---
title: "Spatial Sampling Guideline (Private Repo)"
description: "A guide for sampling in the face of spatial autocorrelation."
date: "Apr 01 2025"
repoURL: "https://github.com/edwardbaleni/SamplingSchemeGuideline.git"
---

## Abstract

Tree based machine learning methods have gained much acclaim as intuitive and flexible data analytical tools capable of exploring nonlinear data structures. These methods have enjoyed much success in studies involving infinite or large finite populations, such as those observed in ecological and spatially orientated studies. In studies of such large populations, tree based algorithms are often built on samples of the population data. These samples are often taken with the intention of collecting a subset of the population which may be representative of the entire population. However, a vulnerability of tree based models is their sensitivity to changing data. Therefore, models built on different samples of data or with data obtained under different sampling schemes may perform inconsistently. As such, this paper focused on studying the effects of various sampling schemes on tree based machine learning algorithms. Since these methods have enjoyed much success in the spatial and ecological research domain, the population chosen to carry out this study was aboveground biomass. Aboveground (AGB) biomass is a biophysical variable which plays an important role in the tracking of carbon cycles and climate change. Therefore, the purpose of this research task was to model lively woody biomass (aboveground), using tree based machine learning methods, namely decision trees and random forests, and subsequently to assess the models’ performances under traditional and spatial cross validation approaches, for various sampling schemes. The schemes assessed were random, stratified, cluster, systematic and non-aligned sampling under samples sizes of 500, 2000 and 5000. Prior to modelling and analysis, the AGB population was shown to be spatially autocorrelated, as per methods such as global and local Moran’s I. The results of the study suggested the non-aligned sampling scheme as the most precise and least variable scheme to use under a small sample size, and the random scheme as the best performing scheme under larger sample sizes. This study concludes with specific suggestions to further the study and the limitations of its findings, having deemed this area of research as valuable under broader contexts.
