---
title: "Sentiment Analysis and Topic Modeling of South African State of the Nation Addresses (1994-2023): Exploring Presidential Sentiments and Evolving Thematic Priorities"
description: "Exploring Presidential Sentiments and Evolving Thematic Priorities."
date: "Oct 17 2023"
demoURL: "https://edwardbaleni.github.io/LDA-SA/"
repoURL: "https://github.com/edwardbaleni/LDA-SA.git"
---

## Abstract

Due to the large volume of text data available today, sentiment analysis and topic modelling have become popular methods to classify documents (or other pieces of text) based on their emotional content and topics or themes present. Sentiment analysis and topic modelling methods provide techniques to programmatically categorize documents and does not require individuals to sit and read through large documents. In this report, sentiment analysis and topic modelling is applied to State of the Nation Addresses in South Africa between 1994 and 2023. The sentiment analysis sectiosn allows one to identify different presidents' sentiments conveyed in their speeches and how this changed over time. Topic modelling highlights what the major themes are that each president speaks about and if the proportion of time spent on each topic changes over time. The results of the sentiment analysis showed that, overall, South African presidents have a net positive sentiment in their speeches. Specifically, Mandela and Mbeki became more positive in their speeches over the time of their presidency while Zuma and Ramaphosa has become less positive during their time in office. These findings correlate with what was happening in South Africa at the times of their respective presidencies. Topic modelling extracted four key topics or themes which were given the following labels: Economic Growth, Social Development, Public Governance and Politics and Administration. The four topics were tracked over time for each president and results show how different presidents' different speeches contained varying levels of each of these four topics.

## Introduction

The aim of this assignment is to provide a descriptive analysis of the State of the Nation speeches in South Africa between 1994 and 2022. This descriptive analysis is performed using sentiment analysis and topic modelling. Sentiment analysis aims to describe the content of text in terms of its 'emotions' (Silge & Robinson, 2017). The purpose of performing sentiment analysis on these speeches is to identify the overall tone or emotion of the speech and identify how this might change over time or as presidents change. Topic modelling is a technique that aims to summarize text, in this case speeches, in terms of a number of topics. It is a way of categorizing speeches into different topics and identifying the main themes of a body of text (Silge & Robinson, 2017). This is of interest in order to identify what topics or themes are important in the context of the government of South Africa and how these themes or main topics may change over time or over different presidents.

The rest of the report is structured as follows: a brief literature review is given on descriptive analysis and the research previously done that uses sentiment analysis and topic modelling to analyse presidential speeches. The data, data cleaning and methodology for performing sentiment analysis and topic modelling follow on from the literature review. The results of the descriptive analysis on the SONA speeches will then be presented and discussed. Finally, the conclusion summarises the important findings from this research.

Additionally, Chat GPT was used as an aid to this report. The purpose of this was to experiment with large language models and to assess Chat GPT's ability to assist with the research and the report itself. A brief summary of its performance and how it responded to different prompts and guides is given as an addendum to the report (see the Use of ChatGPT tab of this website).


## Findings

This report has outlined a descriptive analysis of the State of the Nation speeches in South Africa between 1994 and 2023. This descriptive analysis was carried out by implementing sentiment analysis and topic modelling on the speech data. This analysis has highlighted the importance of being able to manipulate and wrangle text data in order to convert it into useful formats. In addition it has shown how both sentiment analysis and topic modelling are useful tools to extract meaning from text data without having to read through the full speeches. The sentiment analysis showed the positive or negative sentiments of each president and described how these sentiments changed over time. Significant increases or decreases in positive sentiment were also able to be noted. The topic modelling technique pulled out four topics that the presidents conveyed in their speeches. These topics were able to be tracked over time for each president which gave insight into which topics different presidents thought were more or less important to speak about. There are some limitations to the analysis that has been done such as the lack of certain words in the sentiment lexicons and assumptions of 'neutral' words. In addition, for the topic modelling, there is no set number of topics that should be chosen and so a potential limitation is not conducting more analysis with varying numbers of topics. Overall, this report has given an overview of how to conduct a descriptive analysis of text data and has highlighted two popular techniques, sentiment analysis and topic modelling.
