---
title: "Analysis of Football Players’ Attributes and Market Value"
description: "Unsupervised analysis of player performance and value."
date: "May 17 2023"
repoURL: "https://github.com/edwardbaleni/FootballPricing.git"
---

## Abstract
The use of multivariate analysis (MVA) techniques have not been exhaustively used in the domain of football. In more recent publications, the use of clustering, factor analysis and optimisation have been used in the domain of football. The literature often does not extend much further than this at the mention of multivariate analysis techniques. This has introduced one fundamental idea behind this study, which is to explore the potential benefits of interlacing these techniques in the analysis of football related data. Another crucial point is the ability to objectively assess the market value and rating of football players. Market value in prior years has been evaluated by professionals and more recently by crowdsourcing, which are both very stringent approaches to the evaluation of market value, but are also two very subjective views, making them both irreproducible. A major aim of this study is to use data driven methods to invoke reproducibility of these measures and to suggest ways in which to ultimately remove the bias in this prediction of market value. Player rating is also a very important factor as it interlinks very closely to what a players' true market value should be. This study makes use of principle component analysis and robust principle component analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the data; following this, hierarchical clustering and k-means clustering are use to examine the behaviour of the observations; biclustering, a method, which has not been used in football before is employed to assess modules present in the data; finally, methods of prediction are utilised to reproduce the valuations made by crowdsourcing and FIFA. 

## Introduction
Football is a team sport that involves a team of 11 players kicking a ball towards a goal while being opposed by another team. Professional football, is a career in which people are paid to take part in this sport. A club is an organization composed of players, individuals who manage players and those who manage the organization. In the world of professional football, team owners and managers are always making important decisions about the future of the club. Among these decisions are those concerning both the current players in the club and those they wish to transfer in the near future. For this process to take place, they must be able to determine the market value of these players using all the information available about them. In the late 90s and early 2000s the primary method of player valuation was conducted by football experts and team management. Since the start of the 4th industrial revolution, the increase in inter-connectivity meant more people have the means of keeping up to date on football from anywhere in the world. As a result, a crowdsourcing approach has become the most  popular method of player valuation. The leading website on all football related statistics, news, transfer rumours as well as the market value of all players in most of the top leagues in the world is [Transfermarkt](https://www.transfermarkt.com). Founded in Germany by Matthias Seide in 2000, the main aim of the website is to continuously track players and transfer targets. It allows users to create accounts and add their opinions on players to the data base in terms of their performance and their estimated market value. The final market value for each player is a result of the analysis of each users opinion. This paper will go over the limitations of this crowdsourcing method and investigate how using a machine learning based approach can identify these limitations and provide a guideline on how one may go about overcoming them in determining a players market value and FIFA rating, using indicators from the 21/22 football season. 

## Findings
The study sought out to provide a framework for MVA and the reprodcution of both football player valuation and rating. Data was collected as the transfers made in the summer 2021/2022 football transfer window. A PCA was performed, but was found to be insufficient as this did not account for outliers; following this a RPCA was done to remedy the previous problem. This RPCA provided a diagnostic plot of the outliers which allowed some insight into which players should be scouted by teams and which should be left alone, it also helped inform on which players are liabilities and should be sold from their respective team for the sake of that team. Following this the RPCA was able to classify players into position according to certain metrics, this idea informs the remainder of the study. Clustering was then used as a means to group the players into a respective clusters. 3 clusters were ultimately formed which helped separate attacking strong players, defensive strong players and players who did not perform well in the 2021/2022 season. Biclustering was then utilised to confirm the ideas brought about by the outlier maps that were a part of the RPCA and the meaning of the clusters. It was also helpful in identifying players who were over-valued and under-valued in their position. The biclustering illustrated the difficulty of classifying MF players who were not attacking strong, essentially highlighting a limitation in our data that should be examined further.

These exploratory steps illustrative to buyers and sellers a way in which one may go about choosing players to buy and to sell. It has also helped identify the potential drawbacks of trusting crowdsourcing as a means to measure player valuation. It reveals the bias involved in the assessment of players that would arise due to fame and a neglect in the proper evaluation of lesser known players. This would suggest that there is a space to create a completely data-driven approach to the evaluation of football player value.

Following this, supervised learning was conducted in the form of a MVGLM and this revealed the difficulty of predicting market values using performance statistics because of the unstructured manner in which market values have been previously determined. On the other hand, the FIFA rating were more accurately predicted and the MVGLM proved to be a useful technique for that variable. This further suggests a need study market value in the future, it proposes a need for an unbiased evaluation of player valuation that will be able to remedy the drawbacks of crowdsourcing.